feat: using platform-specific apis (#3788)
JetBrains/kotlin-web-site: docs/topics/multiplatform/multiplatform-expect-actual.md

> different ways to use platform specifics, see [Use platform-specific APIs](multiplatform-connect-to-apis.md).
>
{type="tip"}

## Rules for expected and actual declarations

To define expected and actual declarations, follow these rules:

1. In the common source set, declare a standard Kotlin construct. This could be a function, property, class, interface,
   enumeration, or annotation.
2. Mark this construct with the `expect` keyword. It's your _expected declaration_. These declarations can be used in
   common code but should not include implementation. Instead, the platform-specific code provides this implementation.
3. In each platform-specific source set, declare the same construct in the same package and mark it with the `actual`
   keyword. It's your _actual declaration_. Typically, it contains an implementation using platform-specific libraries.

During compilation for a specific target, the compiler tries to match each actual declaration it finds with the
corresponding _expected_ declaration in common code. The compiler ensures that:

* Every expected declaration in the common source set has a matching actual declaration in every platform-specific
  source set.

> * Expected declarations do not contain any implementation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Expected declarations don't contain any implementation.
```

framework. See [Use platform-specific APIs](multiplatform-connect-to-apis.md#dependency-injection-framework) for examples.

With this approach, you can adopt Kotlin Multiplatform simply by using interfaces and factory functions. If you already
use the DI framework to manage dependencies in your project, it's recommended the same approach for managing platform
dependencies.

### Expected and actual classes

It's possible to use expected and actual classes to implement the same solution:

```kotlin
// In the commonMain source set:
expect class Identity() {
    val userName: String
    val processID: Int
}
```

```kotlin
// In the jvmMain source set:
actual class Identity {
    actual val userName: String = System.getProperty("user.name") ?: "None"
    actual val processID: Long = ProcessHandle.current().pid()
}
```

```kotlin
// In the nativeMain source set:
actual class Identity {
    actual val userName: String = getlogin()?.toKString() ?: "None"
    actual val processID: Long = getpid().toLong()
}
```

You might have seen this approach in demonstration materials before. However, using classes in simple cases where
interfaces would be sufficient is _not recommended_.

> With interfaces, you do not limit your design to one implementation per target platform. Also, it's much easier to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With interfaces, you don't limit your design to one implementation per target platform. Also, it's much easier to
```

typically provides an expected `CommonViewModel` class, whose actual Android counterpart extends the `ViewModel` class
from the Android framework. See [Use platform-specific APIs](multiplatform-connect-to-apis.md#adapting-to-an-existing-hierarchy-using-expected-actual-classes)
for a detailed description of this example. -->

## Advanced usages of the expect/actual mechanism

There are a number of special cases regarding expected and actual declarations.

### Using type aliases to satisfy actual declarations

The implementation of an actual declaration does not have to be written from scratch. It can be an existing type, such
as a class provided by a third-party library.

You can use this type as long as it meets all the requirements associated with the expected declaration. For example,
consider these two expected declarations:

```kotlin
expect enum class Month {
    JANUARY, FEBRUARY, MARCH, APRIL, MAY, JUNE, JULY,
    AUGUST, SEPTEMBER, OCTOBER, NOVEMBER, DECEMBER
}

expect class MyDate {
    fun getYear(): Int
    fun getMonth(): Month
    fun getDayOfMonth(): Int
}
```

> Within a JVM module, the `java.time.Month` enum could be used to implement the first expected declaration and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Within a JVM module, the `java.time.Month` enum can be used to implement the first expected declaration and
```

the `java.time.LocalDate` class to implement the second. However, there's no way to add the `actual` keyword directly to
these types.

Instead, you can use [type aliases](type-aliases.md) to connect the expected declarations and the platform-specific
types:

```kotlin
actual typealias Month = java.time.Month
actual typealias MyDate = java.time.LocalDate
```

The `typealias` declaration should be defined in the same package as the expected declaration, while the referred class

> should be defined elsewhere.

Reviewer: Can we remove "should" and make this whole paragraph imperative?

> Since the `LocalDate` type uses the `Month` enum, you need to declare both of them as expected classes in common code.
>
{type="note"}

<!-- See [Using platform-specific APIs](multiplatform-connect-to-apis.md#actualizing-an-interface-or-a-class-with-an-existing-platform-class-using-typealiases)
for an Android-specific example of this pattern. -->

### Widened visibility in actual declarations

You can make actual implementations more visible than the corresponding expected declaration. This is useful if you
don't want to expose your API as public for common clients.

> Currently, the Kotlin compiler issues an error in case of visibility changes. You can suppress this error by

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, the Kotlin compiler issues an error in the case of visibility changes. You can suppress this error by
```

}
```

Then, you can use the following actual implementation in a platform-specific source set as well:

```kotlin
@Suppress("ACTUAL_WITHOUT_EXPECT")
public actual typealias Messenger = MyMessenger
```

Here, an internal expected class has an actual implementation with an existing public `MyMessenger` using type aliases.

### Additional enumeration entries on actualization

When an enumeration is declared with `expect` in the common source set, each platform module should have a
corresponding `actual` declaration. These declarations must contain the same enum constants, but they can have
additional constants too.

This is very useful when you actualize an expected enum with an existing platform enum. For example, consider the
following enumeration in the common source set:

```kotlin
// In the commonMain source set:
expect enum class Department { IT, HR, Sales }
```

When you provide an actual declaration for `Department` in platform source sets, you can add extra constants:

```kotlin
// In the jvmMain source set:
actual enum class Department { IT, HR, Sales, Legal }
```

```kotlin
// In the nativeMain source set:
actual enum class Department { IT, HR, Sales, Marketing }
```

> However, matching `Department` in common code can never be exhaustive now. Therefore, the compiler requires you

Reviewer: I don't understand this sentence. Does it mean that all possible cases need to be covered?

### Expected annotation classes

Expected and actual declarations can be used with annotations. For example, you can declare an `@XmlSerializable`
annotation, which must have a corresponding actual declaration in each platform source set:

```kotlin
@Target(AnnotationTarget.CLASS)
@Retention(AnnotationRetention.SOURCE)
expect annotation class XmlSerializable()

@XmlSerializable
class Person(val name: String, val age: Int)
```

This might be helpful to reuse existing types on a particular platform. For example, on the JVM, you can define your
annotation using the existing type from the JAXB specification:

```kotlin
import javax.xml.bind.annotation.XmlRootElement

actual typealias XmlSerializable = XmlRootElement
```

There is an additional consideration when using `expect` with annotation classes. Annotations are used to attach
metadata to code and do not appear as types in signatures. It's not essential for an expected annotation to have an
actual class on a platform where it's never required.

Because of this, you only need to provide an `actual` declaration on platforms where the annotation is used. This

> behavior is not enabled by default, and it requires the type to be marked with [`OptionalExpectation`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin/-optional-expectation/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
behavior isn't enabled by default, and it requires the type to be marked with [`OptionalExpectation`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin/-optional-expectation/).
```

>
{type="warning"}

Expected and actual declarations allow you to access platform-specific APIs from the Kotlin Multiplatform modules.
Then, in the common code, you can then provide platform-agnostic APIs.

> This article describes the language mechanism of expected and actual declarations. For general recommendations on
> different ways to use platform specifics, see [Use platform-specific APIs](multiplatform-connect-to-apis.md).
>
{type="tip"}

## Rules for expected and actual declarations

To define expected and actual declarations, follow these rules:

1. In the common source set, declare a standard Kotlin construct. This can be a function, property, class, interface,
   enumeration, or annotation.
2. Mark this construct with the `expect` keyword. It's your _expected declaration_. These declarations can be used in
   common code but shouldn't include any implementation. Instead, the platform-specific code provides this implementation.
3. In each platform-specific source set, declare the same construct in the same package and mark it with the `actual`
   keyword. It's your _actual declaration_. Typically, it contains an implementation using platform-specific libraries.

> During compilation for a specific target, the compiler tries to match each actual declaration it finds with the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During compilation for a specific target, the compiler tries to match each _actual_ declaration it finds with the
```

You can define an `Identity` type and a factory function `buildIdentity()`, which is declared in the common source set
and implemented differently in platform source sets:

1. In `commonMain`, declare a simple type and expect a factory function:

  ```kotlin
  package identity

  class Identity(val userName: String, val processID: Long)
  
  expect fun buildIdentity(): Identity
  ```

2. In the `jvmMain` source set, implement a solution using standard Java libraries:

  ```kotlin
  package identity
  
  import java.lang.System
  import java.lang.ProcessHandle

  actual fun buildIdentity() = Identity(
      System.getProperty("user.name") ?: "None",
      ProcessHandle.current().pid()
  )
  ```

3. In the `nativeMain` source set, implement a solution with [POSIX](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/POSIX) using native
   dependencies:

  ```kotlin
  package identity
  
  import kotlinx.cinterop.toKString
  import platform.posix.getlogin
  import platform.posix.getpid

  actual fun buildIdentity() = Identity(
      getlogin()?.toKString() ?: "None",
      getpid().toLong()
  )
  ```

  Here, platform functions return platform-specific `Identity` instances.

> > Starting with Kotlin version 1.9.0, using `getlogin()` and `getpid()` requires the `@OptIn` annotation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Starting with Kotlin version 1.9.0, using `getlogin()` and `getpid()` functions requires the `@OptIn` annotation.
```

}
```

Then, you can use the following actual implementation in a platform-specific source set as well:

```kotlin
@Suppress("ACTUAL_WITHOUT_EXPECT")
public actual typealias Messenger = MyMessenger
```

Here, an internal expected class has an actual implementation with an existing public `MyMessenger` using type aliases.

### Additional enumeration entries on actualization

When an enumeration is declared with `expect` in the common source set, each platform module should have a
corresponding `actual` declaration. These declarations must contain the same enum constants, but they can have
additional constants too.

This is very useful when you actualize an expected enum with an existing platform enum. For example, consider the
following enumeration in the common source set:

```kotlin
// In the commonMain source set:
expect enum class Department { IT, HR, Sales }
```

When you provide an actual declaration for `Department` in platform source sets, you can add extra constants:

```kotlin
// In the jvmMain source set:
actual enum class Department { IT, HR, Sales, Legal }
```

```kotlin
// In the nativeMain source set:
actual enum class Department { IT, HR, Sales, Marketing }
```

> However, matching `Department` in common code can never be exhaustive now. Therefore, the compiler requires you

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, it's now possible that these extra constants in platform source sets won't match with those in common code. Therefore, the compiler requires you
```
